Do you know what the critical points of a function means.
If you don't then this is going to be a super exciting video for you.
And if you do know what the critical points are then.
Well I hope it's still pretty exciting.
You will get to see methods for computing for finding the critical points in Python.
And perhaps that's new to you.
So then it will be exciting.
All right.
So let's say we have some function here.
So what are the critical points of this function.
Well the critical points are these three points right here.
Now why are these points special.
Why are these called critical points.
Well you can see in the function that that's the points where they kind of level off and change direction.
So it's kind of comes to a stop and then turns around and goes the other way.
That's a bit of the idea of a critical point.
In fact the more formal definition of a critical point is to identify the points where the derivative
of the function cross is 0.
So here you see the derivative of this function.
So here's the function in blue and it's derivative is in this greenish color.
And now if you look across at the zero line so y equals zero when the derivative crosses zero then that
point on the function is called a critical point.
So here the derivative crosses zero here and here the derivative crosses zero.
And that's why we have our three critical points here.
Now in truth that's only half of the definition of critical points.
All the critical points are where the derivative is equal to zero or where the derivative is undefined
for some reason let's say if the derivative is you know some weird point at minus infinity or something
over zero.
But for this video we were only going to be considering critical points where the derivative is equal
to zero.
OK.
So this is some pictures I hope this gives you a bit of a intuition a visual graphical intuition for
what critical points are and how to identify them.
I want to now show you an example.
So actually this function is minus X to the power of four plus three times X squared.
So that's the function.
Then we can take the derivative and this is a pretty straightforward function to take the derivative
of because it's just some polynomial so the derivative which you see in this cyan line here is minus
four times x cubed plus six x.
Okay.
Now I said that we want to find the points in the derivative that are equal to zero.
So what we do is take this function and set it equal to zero.
And you've actually seen this before in this course in the algebra 2 section in particular.
This is a polynomial expression.
We set it equal to zero and then we just want to find the roots of this expression which means the x
values that satisfy this equation.
Okay.
So it turns out this isn't too difficult.
You can do this by hand with a piece of paper and a pen or you can probably even solve this in your
head if you like.
It turns out that these solutions the algebraic solutions to this equation are x equals zero which you
see here and X equals plus or minus the square root of three over two.
And that's these points over here.
Now I'm going to switch to Python.
I'm going to show you two different methods for computing the critical points of a function.
One method I call the empirical method because we are just going to be evaluating this function and
the second method will be using simplify and of course that's like this symbolic or the analytic solution
in this video we are going to use these simple AI module the NUM pi module map plot lived up pi plot
and this function fine peaks which is from the CI pi dot signal toolbox I introduce you to this function
find peaks way way way back in the course in the section on algebra 2 and I forget offhand what the
title of the video was but it was something about finding the extreme points of a function.
Okay so let's begin by creating a function actually just to be clear I'm going to start with the empirical
method and you will see over the next seven to ten minutes why I call this the empirical method.
So I'm going to start by defining some variable X so known pi Lynn space let's go from minus five to
plus five in one thousand steps.
That seems like a pretty good resolution.
Now we're going to define F of X and I'm going to set that equal to x squared times e to the minus X
squared.
So it's a pretty interesting function you'll see what this looks like in a moment.
Actually no.
Let's already plot it.
I'm going to plot x by f of x.
And here you can see what this function looks like now to me.
This function looks like an M but maybe I'm just partial to seeing Ms everywhere.
Now it happens that for this particular function we can compute the critical points by identifying the
Maxima and the minima of this function.
And that works because for this function the the two local maxima are the points where the function
stops and changes direction.
So it kind of slows down and it changes direction.
So this is going to be where the function is instantaneously flats which means the derivative is zero.
And then here that's also going to work.
And that's because this point ends up touching exactly zero right here and you can see that because
at x equals zero.
This term is zero.
So the entire function is zero.
And then because this is E to the minus X squared these tales always are positive.
They're strictly non negative.
They never even touch zero.
Exactly.
Okay.
So let's find the local extreme points of this function.
So let's say local max equals find peaks of F X and then just as a bit of a reminder let's see what
local Max looks like.
Okay.
So you can see it's an array.
It gives us two values.
And then there's actually a second output here in the second element of this tuple.
And what we really care about is this array here and not this additional information.
You can read more about that here.
That was basically just other information about the peaks which we haven't actually requested.
So if I only want the first output I can use square brackets here and just say zero.
And now that just returns this array.
So these are in fact the local maxima and then the local minima.
I can get by finding the peaks of the negative of the function.
So we just turn the function upside down and if this seems weird then you can take a moment and refer
back to the video on finding extreme points in the section.
Algebra 2.
OK.
So let's print this out.
Let's see what these end up being.
So I'm going to print the critical points are and then I'll say plus string.
So what do we want.
We actually don't really care about the local max persay because these are actually just indices.
What we want is those indices into the variable x.
So that is when you look here you know there actually is no value of 400 or 600 in this array instead.
This is telling us that the index 400 so the 400 point in X is where F of X has a local maximum.
So in fact what we want here is to say X of local max and then
the local minimum so acts of local men.
Okay let's print this out.
So this is telling us that the critical points.
It's good to have a proper spelling in here.
The critical points are minus not quite one and not quite one and minus something is not quite zero.
So this might seem a little bit strange because in fact if you were to put this value into this function
that's going to be something that's greater than zero right.
It's gonna be some small number but it's going to be greater than zero.
But you can see obviously that zero is the minimum.
So what is going on here.
Well what's going on here is actually about the democratization and there actually is no exact zero
in this vector X and that has to do with this descriptive station here.
Now if I were to change this from an even number to an odd number like 1001 then we in fact are going
to have exactly zero.
And that's because if you go from negative some number to positive some number in an odd number of steps
then you're always going to have exactly one point in the middle which in this case is zero.
So now watch I've just changed this function from this.
The resolution of X from 1000 to 1000 and one and now the critical points are minus one plus one and
zero.
And that actually is the correct answer.
And so that is an important lesson here that when you are implementing math in computers you always
have to be careful when you are describing.
Now I'm going to show you in a moment the symbolic or analytic solution which doesn't suffer from this
problem.
Nonetheless I think it's pretty important to know about.
OK.
Let's see.
So I want to plot these critical points.
So P L T dot plot and again it's not the local max per say that I want to plot it's those indices into
the vector x that I want to plot.
And same goes for the function it is the local max indices in those functions.
And let's make this a red circle.
Okay.
So that's looking good.
And then I want the local minima so plot x local men and effects of local men and let's make them how
about a green square.
All right that looks pretty good.
Another thing that I would like to do is plot the derivative on top of this function.
Now notice I can't use SIM dot def as I have in previous videos and that's because this is not a symbolic
expression.
This is not assume a simple object.
So instead what I need to do is literally just compute the diff the differential of this function and
that I'm going to do by writing D if X equals num pi dot diff of F of X.
Okay.
So this is going to give us the differential or the difference.
So it's the discrete derivative of this function.
It's really just the difference at each time point in the function.
So now let's make a plot of this so we'll plot this on top.
So let's see X by D F X.
Mm hmm.
And now we get an error.
This is not the arrow I was hoping for.
Okay fix that typo error.
Now we get the error that I was hoping for.
This says X and Y must have the same first mentioned but they have shapes 1000 and 1 and 1000.
So what is going on here.
Well what's going on here is that X is a thousand and one time points of course because that's what
I specified here.
But the derivative is actually one point fewer.
And that's because what this function diff is doing is saying that each element in D F X is equal to
each element and F X minus its neighbor minus the one that comes after it.
So that means that this is going to have one point less than this vector here or so then this vector
here.
So to plot this what we need to do is actually just run X from the beginning up until the end minus
one point so that's supposed to be 1.
Mm hmm.
But the derivative looks a little bit small.
Maybe I've done something wrong here.
Actually when you think about the notation for the derivative it's always something like this.
It's def by D X and so this expression here is actually just computing D F so in fact we need to divide
this by the differential of X so what is D X here.
Well D X is actually just the smallest increment of X that we have.
So we can set that to be x 1 minus x 0 Uh huh.
And now we get a derivative that looks right.
It's on the same scale as the original function.
OK.
So you can see why I call this the empirical method of finding the critical points of this function.
Now I'd like to repeat this method but showing you the analytic or symbolic method so to do this we're
gonna start using these simple AI modules so I'm going to define a symbolic variable X and then I will
create a function and it's gonna be the same function of course but I have to redefine it in terms of
this symbolic variable x.
And of course this is no longer num PI that e XP it's actually Sim for simple e XP.
So then minus X squared.
Okay.
And now we're gonna go about solving the critical points here slightly differently from how I did up
above.
So here I'm going to define the derivative and that's going to be the symbolic version of the derivative.
And then what we want to do is solve for zero so I'm going to say that the critical points are Sim dots
solve of D F X.
So you might remember when I introduced you to this sim dot solve function earlier in the course.
And essentially what it's going to do is solve for this expression equals zero and actually let me show
you what that expression looks like.
Okay so here we get well it's some slightly longer expression and this basically comes from the chain
rule.
Because we have multiple functions that are multiplying each other and also functions that are embedded
in the exponential.
So this is the derivative of this function here.
And now we get crit points so the critical points and you can see that that is minus 1 0 and 1 which
we can confirm are these same values here and the same values that we got in the plot.
However of course that was different for from when we were using an even number of points OK so this
is going to give more accurate results.
Still I think it's nice to know both methods and if you like you can also reproduce this graph or a
graph that looks very similar to this and simply by using simplifies plotting routines basically to
plot this function and its derivative and also identify the critical points in this video.
I reviewed the idea of critical points.
The formal definition as setting the derivative equal to zero.
And I showed you two methods in Python for identifying critical points of a function.
Now don't go too far away because there's going to be an exercise in the next video all about critical
points.
It's going to be a pretty fun exercise.
And I look forward to walking through my solution.